You mentioned the elephant and the, the monkey riding the elephant and, uh,
consciousness is the monkey.
And there's some prodding that the monkey gets to do.
And sometimes the elephant listens.
I heard you got into some content, maybe you can correct me,
but I heard you got into some contentious free little discussions. Uh,
is this with Sam Harris or something like that?
Not, not that I know of.
Some people on clubhouse told me you made a, a bunch of, uh, um,
big debate points about free will. Well, let me just then ask you where,
where in terms of the monkey and the elephant, uh,
do you think we land in terms of the illusion of free will,
how much control does the monkey have?
Uh, we have to think about what the, um, free will is in the first place.
We are not the machine.
We are not the thing that is making the decisions we are model of that decision
making process. Yeah.
And there is a difference between making your own decisions and
predicting your own decisions. Yes.
And that difference is the first person perspective
and what, um, basically makes decision making. Um,
and the conditions of free will distinct from just automatically doing the best
thing is that, uh, we often don't know what the best thing is.
You make decisions under uncertainty.
We make informed bets using a betting algorithm that we don't yet understand
because we haven't reversed engineered our own minds efficiently.
We don't know the expected rewards.
We don't know the mechanism by which we estimate the rewards and so on,
but there is an algorithm we observe ourselves performing mm-hmm <affirmative>
where we see that, uh, we wait facts in factors and the future,
and then some kind of possibilities.
Some motive gets raised to an intention and that's informed bet that the system
is making and that making of the informed bet,
the representation of that is what we call free will.
And it seems to be paradoxical because we think that's the crucial thing is
about it that somehow deterministic. And yet, if it was deterministic,
it would be random. And it cannot be random because it was, if it was random,
if just di were being thrown in the universe, randomly forces you to do things,
it would be meaningless.
So the important part of the decisions is always the deterministic stuff, but,
um,
it appears to be determin to you because it's unpredictable because if it was
predictable, you wouldn't experience it as a free will decision, right?
You would experience it as just doing the necessary right thing.
And you see this continuum between the free will and the execution of
automatic behavior when you are observing other people. So for instance,
when you are observing your own children, <affirmative>,
if you don't understand them, you will, uh,
use this agent model where you have a agent with a set point generator mm-hmm
<affirmative> and, uh, the agent is doing the best.
It can to minimize the difference of the set point.
And it might be confused and, uh, sometimes impulsive of whatever,
but it's acting on its own free will mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And when you understand what happens in the mind of the child,
you see that it's automatic and you can out model the child.
You can build things around the child that will lead the child to making exactly
the decision that you are predicting. And in under these circumstances,
like when you are a stage musician or somebody who is dealing, uh,
with people that this you sell a car to,
and you completely understand the psychology and the impulses and the space of
thoughts that this individual can have at that moment under these circumstances
makes no sense to attribute free will because it's no longer decision making
certainty. You are already certain for them, there's uncertainty,
but you already know what they're doing.
But what about for you?
So is this akin to like systems like cellular or ATO
where it's deterministic,
but when you squint your eyes a little bit,
it starts look like there's agents making decisions at the higher
sort of when you zoom out and look at the entities that are
composed by the individual cells, even though the there's, uh,
underlying simple rules that, uh,
make the system evolve in deterministic ways,
it looks like there's organisms making decisions is that where
the illusion of free will emerges at jump and scale.
It's a particular type of model, but this jump and scale is crucial.
The jump and scale happens whenever you have too many parts to count and you
cannot make a model at that level.
And you try to find some higher level regularity.
And the higher level regularity is a pattern that you project into the world to
make sense of it. And agency is one of these patterns, right?
You have all these cells that interact with each other and the cells in our body
are set up in such a way that they benefit if their behavior is coherent,
which means that they act as if they were serving a common goal, right.
And that means that they will evolve regulation mechanisms that, uh,
act as if they were serving a common goal. And now you can make sense of these,
all these cells by projecting the common goal into.
Them, right? So for you then free world is an illusion.
No, it's a model. And it's a construct.
It's basically a model that the system is making of its own behavior.
And it's a model that it can come up with under the circumstances,
and it can get replaced by a different model, which is automatic behavior.
And you fully understand the mechanism under which you're acting.
Yeah. But the another word for model is what story.
So it's a story you're telling. I mean, do you actually have control?
Is there such a thing as a you,
and is thing is you have in control. So like, are you
manifesting your evolution as a, as a entity,
in.
Some sense, the, you as the model of the system that is in control,
it's a story that the system tells itself about somebody who is in control.
Yeah.
And the contents of that model are being used to inform the behavior of the
system.
Okay. So.
The system is completely mechanical mm-hmm <affirmative> and the system creates
that story, like a loom. And then, uh,
it uses the contents of that story to inform its actions and writes the
results of that actions into the.
Story. So how's that non illusion, the story is written then,
or a rather we're not the writers of the story.
Yes. But we always knew that.
No, we, we don't know that. When did we know that? I.
Think that's mostly a confusion about concepts. The, uh,
conceptual illusion in our culture comes from the idea that we live in physical
reality mm-hmm <affirmative>,
and that we experience physical reality and that you have ideas about it. Yep.
And then you have this, uh,
dual list interpretation where you have two substances, uh,
re extends the world that you can touch.
And that is made of extended things and risk congregants,
which is the world of ideas. And in fact,
both of them are mental representations.
One is the representations of the world as a game engine that your mind
generates to make sense of the perceptual data and the other ones, the world.
Yes. That's what we perceive as the physical world.
But we already know that the physical world is nothing like that. Right. Front,
the mechanics is very different from what you, you and me perceive as the world,
the world, you and me perceive as a game engine. Yeah. And, uh,
no colors and sounds in the physical world,
they only exist in the game engine generated by your brain.
And then you have ideas that are not, cannot be mapped onto extended regions.
Right? So the objects that have a spatial extension in the game engine, uh,
Reza and the objects that don't have a physical extension in the game, uh,
engine are ideas.
And they both interact in our mind to produce models of the world. Yep. But.
You know, when you play video games,
I understand that what's actually happening is zeros and ones inside of, uh,
an side of a computer side of a CPU and a GPU.
But you're still seeing like, uh, the rendering of that.
And you're still making decisions whether to shoot,
to turn left or to turn right.
If you're playing a shooter or every time I start thinking about Skyra and El
scrolls, uh, and walk can run a beautiful nature and swinging a sword,
but it feels like you're making decisions inside that video game.
So even though you don't have direct access, uh,
in terms of perception to the, to the bits, to the zeros and ones,
it still feels like you're making decisions and your decisions are actually
feels like they're being applied all the way down to the zeros and ones. Yes.
So it feels like you have control, even though you don't direct yes.
Access to reality.
So there is basically a special character in the video game that is being
created by the video game engine. Yep.
And this character is serving the aesthetics of the video game, and that is you.
Yes.
But I feel like I have control inside the video game.
Like all those like 12 year olds that kick my on the internet. So,
uh.
For when you play the video game, it doesn't really matter that there's zeros.
And once right, you don't care about the vis of the past.
You don't care about the nature of the PO that advance on what you care about
are the properties of the game that you're playing.
And you hope that the CPU is good enough. Yes.
And a similar thing happens when we interact with physics,
the world that you and me are in is not the physical world,
the world that you and me are in is a dream world.
How close is it to the real world though?
Uh, we know that it's not very close,
but we know that the dynamics of the dream world match the dynamics of the
physical world to a certain degree of resolution, right?
The causal structure of the dream world is different. So you see, for instance,
waves crashing on your feet, right. But there are no waves in the ocean.
There's only water molecules that have tangents, uh,
between the molecules that are, uh, to ex uh,
the result of electrons in the molecules, interacting with each other.
But aren't, they like very consistent we're, we're just seeing a very, uh,
crude approximation. Isn't our dream world, very consistent,
like to the point of being mapped directly one to one to the actual physical
world, as opposed to, uh,
us being completely tricked is this is like where you have, like,
that's not a trick.
That's, that's my point. It's not an illusion. It's a form of data compression.
Yeah. Yeah.
It's an attempt to deal with the dynamics of too many parts to count at the
level at which we're entangled with the best model that you can find.
Yeah. So we can act in that dream world and our actions have impact in the,
in the real world, in the physical world. Yes. To which we don't have access.
Yes.
But it's basically like, uh,
accepting the fact that the software that we live in,
the dream that you live in is generated by something outside of this world that
you and me are.
In. So is the software deterministic and do we not have any control?
So do we have <laugh> so free will in is, uh,
having a conscious being FreeWheel,
is the monkey being able to steer the elephant? <laugh>.
No, uh, it's, it's slightly different basically in the same way,
as you are modeling, uh, the bottom molecules in the ocean that in Gulf,
your feet, when you are walking on the beach yeah.
As waves and there are of waves, uh,
but only the atoms on more complicated stuff underneath the atoms and so on.
And you know that right. Uh, you would accept. Yes. Uh,
there is a certain abstraction that happens here.
It's a simplification of what happens and simplification that is designed in
such a way that your brain can deal with it temporarily and spatially in terms
of resources and tuned for the predictive value.
So you can predict with some accuracy,
whether your feet are going to get wet or not.
But it's a really good, it's a really good interface and approximation. Yes.
It's equal squared is a good equations, are good approximation. Yes.
For what they're much better approximation. So to me,
waves is a really nice approximation of what's all the complexity that's
happening underneath. Basically.
It's a mission learning model that is constantly tuned to minimize surprises.
So it basically tries to predict as well as it can.
What you're going to perceive next. Are we talking about.
Which is the machine learning, our perception system or the dream world?
The machine world is dream world is the result of the machine learning process
of the perception system.
That's doing the compression.
Yes. And, uh,
the model of you as an agent is not a different type of model or it's,
it's a different type, but not, uh, not different as in its model,
like nature from the, um, model of the ocean, right? Some things are oceans,
some things are agents. And, uh,
one of these agents is using your own control model, the output of your model,
the things that you perceive yourself as doing mm-hmm <affirmative>. And, uh,
that is you.
What about the fact that is like, when you're standing,
um, and with, with the water on your feet, and you're looking out into the vest,
like open water of the ocean,
and then there's a beautiful sunset and it, it, well,
the fact that it's beautiful and then maybe you have like friends or a loved one
with you and like, you feel love. What is that as the dream world? What is that?
Yeah.
It's all, uh, happening inside of the dream. Okay.
But see the word dream makes it seem like it's not real.
Yeah, of course. It's not real. The, uh, the physical universe is real,
but the physical universe is incomprehensible and it doesn't have any feeling of
realness. The feeling of realness that you experience gets at catch to certain
representations where your brain assesses, this is the best model of reality.
That I have.
So the only thing that's real to you is the thing that's happening at the very
base of reality. Like.
The, the, yeah. For something to be real, it needs to be implemented. So, uh,
the model that you have of reality is, uh, real in as far as it is a model,
right?
It's an appropriate description of the world to say that there are models that
are being experienced. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, but, uh,
the world that you experience is not necessarily implemented.